After going to the pool in New York City, I was
transferred to Baltimore to work there out of the
headquarters of the Third Service Command.
There, of course, the veterinarians went into the
packing houses and inspected all of the meat
products and anything that the packing houses
produced that they sold to the Army had to be
inspected. not only for quality, but for quantity
control. If they hadn't had someone there
controlling the quality of the products, we would
be paying, the taxpayers would be paying for water
and fat in the canned meats, and the frankfurters
and bologna. Everything had to be sampled at
random. to be sure that we didn't get too much fat,
too much water in the products, as well as for
quantity and quality control. That, of course,
was the thing that we did in many assignments. I, of
course, was able to attend a school in Chicago.
They called it the Quartermaster Depot where we
were assigned, and we went to school there two
months and learned how to do these inspections.
Also, of course, I was assigned, the nicest
assignment that I received was going down to Fort
Myer, Virginia, where we had a hospital for
animals. We treated the horses that are used there
for pulling the caissons that were used when the
presidents and other dignitaries had their
funerals. And these caissons, of course, were
pulling the coffins to the Arlington Cemetery.
Arlington National Cemetery? Right. Arlington
National Cemetery was adjacent to Fort Myer,
Virginia. And that's the reason the clinic was
there at Fort Myer. And I also, one morning, got to
meet Mrs. Eisenhower because she and the General
Eisenhower were stationed there. She brought her
little Scottish terriers out, and we boarded them
and treated them with vaccinations. It was a post
where General Hap Arnold, General Marshall, and
several other generals were there over the period
of time that I was there. And I lived in the bachelor
officer's quarters, had to wear a number one
uniform, and we never knew who would be in the same
room with us. So we had to be prepared to salute a
general just any day while we were stationed at
Fort Myer. It was the most interesting assignment
that I had. Well, while you were in the armed
services, as the war was drawing to a close in the
mid to latter part of the 40s, what were you
thinking about for the future now that you were a
doctor of veterinary medicine? Did you want to
come back to Texas? What did you have in mind then?
After I left Fort Myer, Virginia, I was sent to New
York City in a pool. And of course, while I was
there, I again had to do some inspection of food in
the packing house. But I wrote to Henderson,
Texas, to see if they needed a veterinarian. I was
looking at the map of East Texas, and I saw the
beautiful traffic circle. And I thought, well,
that highway at least has a good highway system. I
wrote the Chamber of Commerce and asked them if
they needed a veterinarian. And they wrote me and
replied that yes, they needed a young
veterinarian. They had one older man who was
semi-retired, Dr. Ken Deason. So I knew before I
left New York, I was interested in Henderson. But I
had only been at home in Gilmer about three days
when I received an emergency call to go to Mount
Pleasant in Titus County and help vaccinate all
the cattle in the county against anthrax. It had
become an epidemic. So I went up there and I helped
Dr. Norman Ralston for one month. I was home only
three or four days and I got a call from Shreveport.
So Dr. Young in Shreveport, A.V. Young out at Dixie
Garden, clinic needed a young veterinarian. So I
decided, well, it's a good chance to get an
internship. After being in the army for three
years, I needed an internship. So I went to
Shreveport, started working for $175 a month. as a
young veterinarian. When was this, in about 46 or
45? That was in 46. 46. So after staying there about
10 or 11 months, Dr. Young says, well, if you stay
over here, you're going to have to take the
Louisiana State Board. So I told him, well, since I
plan to live in East Texas the rest of most of my
life, I'll just move to Henderson. So I wrote to
Chamber of Commerce or called them, And they said,
oh, yes, we still need a veterinarian. So I came and
visited the Chamber of Commerce, lived in the old
Randolph Hotel for two or three days. And the
chamber manager carried me out to Mr. Gordon
Brown's store and introduced me to Gordon Brown.
And I rented the two rooms on the north side of his
filling station and grocery store and stayed in
that neighborhood for several years. And after I
could practice there, and of course we were only
charging about $2 for a rabies vaccine and $3 or $4
for the other distemper, hepatitis vaccine. We
treated, mainly we treated cattle. 90% of the
practice was cattle. People couldn't afford to
treat their pets, evidently. And they didn't know
very much about having services available for
pets. They did the best they could with home
remedies. So most of your practice was on cattle at
that time? Cattle. I would say 85 to 90 percent
cattle. We had cattle all over the city. What types
of cattle? 40 or 50 milk cows. Okay. Out in the oil
field, cattle were running open range through the
oil field in many places. but many of those people
who were working for the oil companies had milk
cows, and we had dairies at that time, 30 to 30,
maybe 36 at least. I believe Mr. Felix Burton told
me there were 36 dairies here in the late 40s. I
remember five or six in Brockville. We made a
living treating cattle, and it was a hard way to
make a living. But our expenses weren't great. Mr.
Gordon Brown only charged me a small 27 and a half
was my overhead for rent, and he answered my
telephone. And of course, we could get by. We did
very little pet work. When we started spaying
dogs, we only charged $10. You could get dogs
spayed for $10, most anywhere. I had one man who was
a truck driver, brought two dogs in. He said, what
will you charge me if I have two spade at one time?
And I said, about $9 each. He says, well, I can take
them to a veterinarian over near Buckner's
Orphanage Home in Dallas, get them done for $7. So
that, you see, was a different fee schedule from
what veterinarians were able to charge the last
few years. Yeah, sounds like it. Well, where did
you, where were your offices located? You said you
were in Gordon Brown's store, off of his store in a
little room. Where did you move around during the
years? Well, I stayed there until I built my new
clinic out near the traffic circle, the one that
Dr. Rumbo now owns. Right. What year was that? I
think it was 1959. 1959. Okay. Well, how did your
practice grow over the years? When did you start
treating, you know, pets and things like that?
Well, the practice gradually grew. And, of
course, after building the clinic, I could see
that I couldn't do justice to both small animals
and large animals without having some help. So I
hired Dr. Norman Ralston, of course, came and
practiced with me for a while. And also Dr. Lovick
worked with me for a while. And Dr. Rumbo was hired
in 1970. And then later we hired Dr. Corley. There
were three of us there for a while. And, of course,
we also had work to do with testing all the cattle.
in russ county for brucellosis that was the bangs
disease program when every cow in the county had to
be tested and jack rayford used to bring his truck
out every morning and he and i would go out and test
two or three herds of cattle in the time that all the
cows had to be tested we'd schedule two or three
herds a day but at that time i still had to come back
and get caught up at the clinic Well, our guest this
morning, let me take a break right here and tell
you, is Dr. Hugh M. Phillips, doctor of veterinary
medicine who's retired here of Henderson and Russ
County. He practiced veterinary medicine here in
Henderson for 38 years. His practice started, I
believe, in September of 1947. He retired in 1985.
And of course, if you've been in Henderson et al.
Before those years, you've heard of Dr. Hugh M.
Phillips, doctor of veterinary medicine. We're
talking about the history of veterinary medicine
in Texas, and now we're down to the specifics of his
career and also what's going to be going on here in
Russ County. Let's see, were you a single man when
you moved here in 1947? You might better bring us up
to date on the important stuff here. Yeah, I was
very single. Okay. I met my wife here in 1947 at
church, and of course I was able to have a little
time, you know, to devote to courting, but not
much. So it took me a while to decide that perhaps I
might be old enough to get married. So finally we
became engaged. And married in 49. 1949. 1949,
right. And had two daughters, of course, Melanie
Taylor and Sarah Ann Cobb are our two daughters.
Let's don't forget the grandkids now. And, of
course, we have three grandchildren, Blake
Taylor and Adam Taylor. and Miss Stephanie Carr
down in Bryan, Texas. Okay. We definitely had to
get those ladies and the grandkids in this. It
wouldn't be an interview if we didn't. But what I
want to get to now is some of the more interesting
cases you've seen here in Russ County. Now, you
worked with... A lot of people in Russell County,
as you said, you were a people person. You worked
with the farmers and the ranchers and the county
agents. You've worked with several county agents
over the years, including Mr. Felix Burton,
you've named earlier. Let's just go back and kind
of reminisce about some of these different
diseases you've seen, maybe some unusual things
and problems that you faced and how you overcame
them. Well, one of the most unusual things that we
were seeing in cattle when I first came here in 47
was being called X disease because we didn't know
what else to call it. The first case that I saw was
north of Laneville on a farm of Jack Mosley in 1947,
my first year in practice in Russ County. Later it
was seen in caves at the John R. Alford Dairy out on
the Overton Highway. when approximately 12 or 15
of his calves were sick and dying with this strange
disease. It was also diagnosed on a farm owned by
Major Hall, east of Henderson. This disease was
not described in the textbook and had never been
seen before by veterinarians or cattlemen.
Symptoms seen in this condition were the loss of
hair and wrinkling of the skin on their necks, in
the thoracic area of their chest. Tearing was very
profuse, with the tears dripping from their chins
of the calves. Ulcers were present in the mouth and
the stomach, along with severe diarrhea in some
cases. At that time, I consulted A&M College, and
Dr. Hubert Smith was sent to help with the
observation and diagnosis of these strange
diseases. Soon after Dr. Smith spent the day here
visiting these herds of sick animals, he wrote me
that the condition had been diagnosed as
hyperkeratitis due to cattle licking axle grease
and other farm lubricants. It was also seen where
newly treated creosoted timbers were being used
in barnyards. The offending chemical was
chlorinated hydrocarbons used as preservatives
in farm lubricants. Once the cause was known, the
government outlawed the use of these
preservatives and the disease disappeared.
Before they learned what it was, at least a half a
million cattle were lost. in the southern states.
My goodness, just from licking these farm
lubricants off of... And it was also getting into
the cubes, the cattle feed, going through the
machinery, the cube that the cattle were fed had
contained some of that chemical. Another very
unusual condition that we saw down on the farm of
Edgar Lee Keeling. Mr. Keeling lived east of
Brockville there on Clayton Highway. He was
feeding some sweet potatoes to two herds of cattle
in two different pastures because the potatoes
had rotten spots on them. After the third or fourth
feeding of the sweet potatoes, the cattle began to
get sick because they couldn't breathe. They had
this condition which, of course, was due to the
fungus growing on the potato called pulmonary
adenomatosis, a rare disease that can happen if
the potatoes are beginning to rot. This was only
seen once in Russ County, but he lost
approximately 60 head of cattle that he fed these
potatoes. There was another real unusual thing
that took place. White muscle disease was the
diagnosis. One year during the mid-50s, a Russ
County area had an early freeze causing many
acorns to fall from the trees at one time. At this
time, several dozen cattlemen found from two to
six cows down and unable to walk. These downer cows
were all passing coffee-colored urine and lived
only three or four days. They all died regardless
of what you treated them with. Approximately 12
East Texas veterinarians met in Nacogdoches and
came to the conclusion that these cattle were
probably suffering from the tannic acid poison
due to the acorns. One or two weeks later, after our
meeting in Nacogdoches, this condition was
diagnosed by an A&M veterinarian as white muscle
disease due to the deficiency of vitamin E during
the dry period of summer and fall I have recently
learned however that this unusual condition seen
only one year was more likely caused by the cattle
eating the poison weed that is commonly referred
to as coffee beans which is very toxic after the
early freeze in the fall also a very interesting
thing that happened to us was that cattle were
dying Suddenly, in the Harmony Hill community
south of Tatum, several family milk cows died in
one neighborhood. This alarmed Commissioner
R.E. Doc Young, who consulted me. The specimens
taken from the dead animal that we did the
postmortem on were sent to diagnostic
laboratories at A&M in Austin. The diagnosis
confirmed that the cattle were dying with
anthrax. The County Agent Felix Burton, the
Commissioner's Court, and Dr. Richard Winters, a
veterinarian with the State Health Department,
convened, and we decided to quietly vaccinate all
adjacent premises against the disease. The news
of this epidemic was not released to the media in
order to keep the cattle traders from
unofficially boycotting Russ County cattle. A
few years later, one cow died suddenly at the
Dulaney Ranch between Henderson and Laneville.
This animal had classical post-mortem symptoms
of anthrax. I noticed the cow was bleeding from all
of her external openings. Therefore, I suspected
anthrax. I sent specimens to the laboratory, and
they confirmed that this cow died with anthrax. We
still don't know where the disease came from
because we hadn't ever had any anthrax in that part
of the county. But it was confirmed to be anthrax.
We again met with Mr. Burton and commissioners
court and the state veterinarian and decided to do
the same thing. We vaccinated all the adjacent
premises and stopped that epidemic before it got
into the newspaper and the radio and the life
magazine. They had it in the life magazine when
they had an outbreak in Southern Oklahoma a few
years earlier and almost ruined the cattle
industry in that area. But all the anthrax
epidemics that did occur were taken care of
quickly and isolated in different parts of the
county. In this county, we've only had cattle die
in two different places, and we only lost about
eight or ten cattle in the first epidemic before
vaccination started, and I only lost one cow on the
Dulaney Ranch. Okay. Okay. I have some other
interesting things if you have time. Sure. Let's
go ahead. We're making history here today. We've
got you here at the radio station. By the way, our
guest is Dr. Hugh M. Phillips, retired doctor of
veterinary medicine. He practiced 38 years here
in Russ County in Henderson. and of course retired
in 1985, and he and his other cohorts, Texas A&M and
veterinarians, are compiling a book that's going
to be coming out called The History of Veterinary
Medicine in Texas, and we've covered a lot of the
history this morning, and we're down to the
specifics in Russ County and what you've seen as a
vet here in Henderson. What are some of the other
things that you've seen? Well, some of the most
perplexing things that I saw was lead poisoning
and arsenic poisoning in cattle. Before the Russ
County farmers quit raising cotton, arsenic was
used to poison insects on the cotton. The leftover
arsenic was not always easy to, easy or safely
stored or destroyed. People still don't know what
to do with several pounds of arsenic. One rancher,
Ray Calvert, who had moved here and had the Santa
Gertrudis trading business. He sent cattle all
over the world. I remember doing some work for Ray
Cowart and sending some cattle to Vietnam before
the war with Vietnam. He had leased a pasture from
Otis Wiley down at Laneville. He had 50 head of
valuable Santa Gertrudis cattle. One week, these
cattle broke into the barn And they found, just by
milling around in that barn, they found arsenic
that had been stored there in a five gallon milk
can. And the bottom had rusted out of this can. The
cattle knocked the can over and there must have
been 30 or 40 pounds of arsenic in the can. All of
those cattle had licked on that arsenic for two or
three days because it was salty tasting. They all
started dying. We called A&M College to see if
there was any treatment they would recommend that
was new, and I was told that there was nothing you
could do if they had eaten arsenic and you hadn't
started your treatment the first day. So he lost at
least 50 head of valuable Santa Catruta's cattle
from the arsenic that they consumed. Ralph
Ballinger, who lived just north of Henderson,
lost several large hogs when they rooted up a can of
arsenic that had been buried in the barnyard by his
father. The hogs, of course, normally get out and
start rooting around in the soil, and they found
that arsenic. And he, of course, lost all of his big
fat hogs that he planned to kill. Cattlemen in the
Gaston and Joinerville area lost cattle one year
when one oil well servicing company used a treater
solution in cleaning some of the old oil wells.
Arsenic was suspected. Some of this oil around the
wells was tested and found to contain arsenic.
These few cattle were lost, but after the company
learned about the cattle dying, they paid for the
cattle and no more losses occurred. Lead
poisoning cattle was seen on several occasions
when young cattle would lick or drink water from
lead paint buckets that were left around
barnyards by careless owners. Most people have
now learned to be more careful with their paint
buckets. Also,
a very interesting epidemic was seen in 1951 to
1953 when Russ County and other adjacent counties
suffered a rabies epidemic in foxes, dogs, and
cattle. Foxes were chasing cattlemen up trees
when they would go to feed their cattle. Rabies in
cattle and dogs was hard to diagnose clinically.
Some had only the dumb rabies symptoms with
paralysis of the lower jaw, while others would be
violent and vicious. Many cattle owners were
exposed and had to be treated with the Pasteur
treatment, it's called. We're talking about
rabies now. Right. Was there a specific time
period that this was a big problem? It was in the
early 50s in this county. You said foxes and dogs
and cattle now. I don't see too many foxes now. I
know that there are, but there used to be a lot more,
I guess. In the early 50s, we had a lot of foxes and we
had a lot of fox hunters. Now we don't have either.
And the reason is because the state health
department was called in to talk to the cattlemen
and the dog owners. We met in the district
courtroom and authorities decided to warn the dog
owners to confine their dogs while strychnine was
used to poison the foxes, the coyotes, and stray
dogs. This procedure was very unpopular with the
fox hunters, but the rabies epidemic was brought
under control shortly after the program was
finished. The fox population in Russ County never
has replenished. Right. Okay, now we hear of
skunks nowadays. They're fairly plentiful, not
as many as you see in other parts of Texas, but
they're one of the animals that spread rabies too.
What other animals are carriers here in the East
Texas area? Any warm-blooded animal. can have
rabies. Before I moved to Henderson, a man out in
the Churchill area named Poole, I don't think he
was closely related to the other Poole family in
this county, but he had killed a squirrel, and some
of his family remembered that this squirrel bit
him, and he died with rabies. And of course, any
warm-blooded animal, we have seen a lot of rabid
skunks in the county, but For some reason, even
though we find rabid skunks often, we've been
lucky and haven't had too many rabid animals.
We've had a few rabid cats and a few rabid dogs. But
with the vaccination procedure that most people
are doing on their pets, rabies has been brought
under control. And there's two types of rabies,
aren't there? Yes. Can you explain the two and the
different symptoms? That's what makes it so
confusing. The first time I saw a rabid animal was
when I was about 8 or 10 years old. And I had a, well,
my family had a bird dog, pointer. Everybody in
east part of Gilmer knew about old Rap because he
was such a fine bird dog. He came home one day with
the paralysis of his lower jaw and his tongue
hanging out of his mouth. And I consulted my
neighbor, my father, and they consulted the
pharmacist who was helping people make
diagnosis. And most all of the people that saw the
dog thought he had sore mouth, which was a common
disease among dogs.